Due: December 5, 10:00 pm

Late deadline: No late submissions will be accepted.


This is a hard deadline.  This assignment will not be extended into dead week.

You may work in teams of up to 3 on this assignment. EXACTLY ONE MEMBER OF YOUR TEAM SHOULD SUBMIT THE ASSIGNMENT IN CANVAS!  THE TAs WILL ASSESS A PENALTY IF MORE THAN ONE MEMBER OF YOUR GROUP SUBMITS THE ASSIGNMENT, AS THIS CREATES A SIGNIFICANT OVERHEAD FOR THEM WHILE GRADING.  Your submission should include a file, "authors.txt" giving the names and NetIDs of each member of your team.

For this assignment, you will be implementing a disassembler for the binaries that run on our LEGv8 emulator in binary mode.  Your disassembler will handle input files containing any number of contiguous, binary LEGv8 instructions encoded in big-endian byte order.  The input file name will be given as the first command line parameter.  Your output, printed to the terminal, should be--modulo some caveats discussed below--the original LEGv8 assembly code that generated the binary.

Except that it ignores the PC and flow control, a disassembler essentially implements the first two stages (fetch and decode) of the five-stage pipeline described in lecture and the textbook.  A working disassembler requires
roughly half of the total work of building a binary emulator.

Your disassembler should fully support the following set of LEGv8 instructions:

ADD
ADDI
AND
ANDI
B
B.cond: This is a CB instruction in which the Rt field is not a register, but
        a code that indicates the condition extension. These have the values
        (base 16):
        0: EQ
        1: NE
        2: HS
        3: LO
        4: MI
        5: PL
        6: VS
        7: VC
        8: HI
        9: LS
        a: GE
        b: LT
        c: GT
        d: LE
BL
BR: The branch target is encoded in the Rn field.
CBNZ
CBZ
EOR
EORI
LDUR
LSL: This instruction uses the shamt field to encode the shift amount, while
     Rm is unused.
LSR: Same as LSL.
ORR
ORRI
STUR
SUB
SUBI
SUBIS
SUBS
MUL
PRNT: This is an added instruction (part of our emulator, but not part of LEG
      or ARM) that prints a register name and its contents in hex and
      decimal.  This is an R instruction.  The opcode is 11111111101.  The
      register is given in the Rd field.
PRNL: This is an added instruction that prints a blank line.  This is an R
      instruction.  The opcode is 11111111100.
DUMP: This is an added instruction that displays the contents of all
      registers and memory, as well as the disassembled program.  This is an
      R instruction.  The opcode is 11111111110.
HALT: This is an added instruction that triggers a DUMP and terminates the
      emulator.  This is an R instruction.  The opcode is 11111111111

Note that the emulator writes instructions to disk in big-endian byte order. You will have to handle this correctly when decoding (more on this below).

You may implement your disassembler in any language you like so long is it builds (if a compiled language) and runs on pyrite.  This restriction is necessary in order to give the TAs a common platform to test and evaluate
your solution.  Most important, popular, or trendy languages are already installed on pyrite, including C, C++, Java, and Python.  If your language of choice is not installed, you are welcome to contact the system administrators <coms-ssg@iastate.edu> to request its installation; however, we can make no
guarantees about whether or not they will do the installation for you, and--if they do--how timely their service will be.

In past semesters, students stumbled upon the unfortunate idea of converting bitstrings to character strings and doing string manipulations instead of bit manipulations.  At its peek, fully 90% of the class chose this lamentable "solution".  There are many reasons why this leads to a poor solution, notably the excessive time and space overhead it imposes; most importantly, however, this may be the only time in your academic career that somebody makes you do bit manipulations, and we are not going to allow you to duck it. Any efforts to avoid bit manipulations will be rewarded with a static 50% penalty to your assignment grade.  You are required to use bitwise operations to decode all of the instructions.

To clarify the above point, consider a single instruction.  This is a 32-bit value encoding the operation that the computer should perform when the instruction is executed.  In C, C++, or Java, you'll probably load the
instruction into an int.  Suppose that the instruction (in assembly) is:
        SUB X12, X10, XZR

When you load this into an int, you'll have the value 3407806796 decimal (CB1F014C big endian hex, 11001011000111110000000101001100 big endian binary).  You are required to use bit manipulations on this integer in order to extract the fields.  For example, if the instruction is in an integer called inst, then (inst >> 21) & 0x7ff will extract the opcode.  When we manipulate the bits of, e.g., an integer, we call it a bitstring; while it is
technically still an integer, we are using it as a string of bits, not as a number, so we adjust our terminology to reflect the use.  On the other hand, if you were to use an API to convert the value to a string of zeros and ones:
        "11001011000111110000000101001100"
and then use string manipulation functions on that, you will (among other things) multiply the storage for your instruction by a factor of 8 (and get a bad grade).

For example code doing bit manipulation to extract fields from a float in C (it works the same way in C++ and Java), see float_bits_840.c.

In order to minimize the burden on the TAs, your solution should include two bourne shell scripts in the top level directory: build.sh and run.sh. build.sh should include the executable command(s) necessary to build your
program; if your program is in an interpreted language, this file may be empty (but it must exist, nonetheless!).  run.sh should take one parameter, the name of a LEGv8 binary file, and pass it to your disassembler.  For
instance, if I were implementing my disassembler in C and had the program in a source file named disasm.c, my build.sh would contain exactly:

        gcc disasm.c -o disasm

And my run.sh would contain exactly:

        ./disasm $1

Bourne shell scripts are simply text files, and $1 is interpreted as the first positional parameter passed to the script on the command line.  To run your scripts, execute sh build.sh or sh run.sh <legv8 assembly file>.

The data lost in converting from assembly to machine code are comments and label names.  Both of these are completely irretrievable, but new label names can be generated, even if these are devoid of the semantic meanings imparted by the original program author.  For example, you can simply number the labels: "label1", "label2", etc.  Your disassembled output should generate new label names such that our emulator can execute or assemble your generated code.  Your "reassembled disassembly" should be byte-for-byte identical to
the input.

To use the emulator as an assembler (the output file will have the same name is the input with ".machine" concatenated onto the end):

        /share/cs321/legv8emul <legv8 assembly file> -a

To run the emulator in binary emulation mode:
        /share/cs321/legv8emul <legv8 binary file> -b

Here is example C code (extracted from our LEGv8 emulator sources) to load the binary program from disc and correctly handle endianness:

    //This is in main():
    if (binary) {
      fd = open(argv[1], O_RDONLY);
      fstat(fd, &buf);
      program = mmap(NULL, buf.st_size, PROT_READ | PROT_WRITE,
                     MAP_PRIVATE, fd, 0);
      bprogram = calloc(buf.st_size / 4, sizeof (*bprogram));
      for (i = 0; i < (buf.st_size / 4); i++) {
        program[i] = be32toh(program[i]);
        decode(program[i], bprogram + i);
      }
      emulate(bprogram, buf.st_size / 4, &m);

      return 0;
    }


be32toh() is a function found in endian.h which converts 32 bit integers from big endian to host endian.  I will talk more about this, and show some other, related code in lecture.  mmap() maps a file to memory (memory map); one could instead simply iterate over the file, reading in one int at a time until encountering EOF.  decode() and emulate() are functions in the emulator (not part of C or POSIX).

Here is a list of the opcodes, extracted from the emulator sources: opcodes.txt

The 0b prefix (in opcodes.txt) is a GNU extension (supported by GCC and some other compilers, but not an official part of C) that signifies the value that follows is given in binary.